---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Hello World CGP Tutorial

We will demonstrate various concepts of CGP with a simple hello world example.

## Greeter Component

To begin, we import the `cgp` crate and define a greeter component as follows:

```rust
use cgp::prelude::*;

#[cgp_component(Greeter)]
pub trait CanGreet {
    fn greet(&self);
}
```

The `cgp` crate provides common constructs through its `prelude` module, which should be imported in most cases. The first CGP construct we use here is the `#[cgp_component]` macro. This macro generates additional CGP constructs for the `Greeter` trait.

The target of this macro, `CanGreet`, is a **consumer trait** used similarly to regular Rust traits. However, unlike traditional traits, we won't usually implement anything directly on this trait. The argument to the macro, `Greeter`, designates a **provider trait** for the component. The `Greeter` trait is used to define the actual implementations for the greeter component. It has a similar structure to `CanGreet`, but with the implicit `Self` type replaced by a generic `Context` type.

The macro also generates an empty `GreeterComponent` struct, which is used as the **name** of the greeter component which can be used for the component wiring later on.

## Name Getter

Now, we will define an **auto getter trait** to retrieve the name value from a context:

```rust
#[cgp_auto_getter]
pub trait HasName {
    fn name(&self) -> &str;
}
```

The `HasName` trait contains the getter method `name`, which returns a `&str` string value.

The `#[cgp_auto_getter]` attribute macro applied to `HasName` automatically generates a blanket implementation. This enables any context containing a field named `name` of type `String` to automatically implement the `HasName` trait, if it also derives the `HasField` trait.

## Hello Greeter

The traits `CanGreet` and `HasName` can be defined separately across different modules or crates. However, we can import them into a single location and then implement a `Greeter` provider that uses `HasName` in its implementation:

```rust
#[cgp_impl(new GreetHello)]
impl<Context> Greeter for Context
where
    Context: HasName,
{
    fn greet(&self) {
        println!("Hello, {}!", self.name());
    }
}
```

We use `#[cgp_impl]` to define a new provider, called `GreetHello`, which implements the `Greeter` provider trait. The implementation is written to be **generic** over any `Context` type that implements `HasName`.

Normally, it would not be possible to write a blanket implementation like this in vanilla Rust, due to it violating the **overlapping** and **orphan** rules of Rust traits. However, the use of `#[cgp_impl]` and the `Greeter` provider trait allows us to **bypass** this restriction.

Behind the scene, the macro generates an empty struct named `GreetHello`, which is used as an **identifier** of the provider that implements the `Greeter` trait.

Notice that the constraint `HasName` is specified only in the `impl` block, *not* in the trait bounds for `CanGreet` or `Greeter`. This design allows us to use **dependency injection** through Rust’s trait system.

## Person Context

Next, we define a concrete context, `Person`, and wire it up to use `GreetHello` for implementing CanGreet:

```rust
#[derive(HasField)]
pub struct Person {
    pub name: String,
}
```

The `Person` context is defined as a struct containing a `name` field of type `String`.

We use the `#[derive(HasField)]` macro to automatically derive `HasField` implementations for every field in `Person`. This works together with the blanket implementation generated by `#[cgp_auto_getter]` for `HasName`, allowing `HasName` to be **automatically implemented** for `Person` without requiring any additional code.

## Delegate Components

Next, we want to define some wirings to link up the `GreetHello` that we defined earlier, so that we can use it on the `Person` context. This is done by using the `delegate_components!` macro as follows:

```rust
delegate_components! {
    Person {
        GreeterComponent:
            GreetHello,
    }
}
```

We use the `delegate_components!` macro to perform the wiring of `Person` context with the chosen providers for each CGP component that we want to use with `Person`. For each entry in `delegate_components!`, we use the component name type as the key, and the chosen provider as the value.

The mapping `GreeterComponent: GreetHello` indicates that we want to use `GreetHello` as the implementation of the `CanGreet` consumer trait.

## Calling Greet

Now that the wiring is set up, we can construct a `Person` instance and call `greet` on it:

```rust
fn main() {
    let person = Person {
        name: "Alice".into(),
    };

    // prints "Hello, Alice!"
    person.greet();
}
```

This is made possible by a series of blanket implementations generated by CGP. Here's how the magic works:

- We can call `greet` because `CanGreet` is implemented for `Person`.
- `Person` contains the `delegate_components!` mapping that uses `GreetHello` as the provider for `GreeterComponent`.
- `GreetHello` implements `Greeter` for `Person`.
- `Person` implements `HasName` via the `HasField` implementation.

There’s quite a bit of indirection happening behind the scenes!

## Conclusion

By the end of this tutorial, you should have a high-level understanding of how programming in CGP works. There's much more to explore regarding how CGP handles the wiring behind the scenes, as well as the many features and capabilities CGP offers. To dive deeper, check out our book [Context-Generic Programming Patterns](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/).

## Full Example Code

Below, we show the full hello world example code, so that you can walk through them again without the text.


```rust
use cgp::prelude::*; // Import all CGP constructs

// Derive CGP provider traits and blanket implementations
#[cgp_component(Greeter)]
pub trait CanGreet // Name of the consumer trait
{
    fn greet(&self);
}

// A getter trait representing a dependency for `name` value
#[cgp_auto_getter] // Derive blanket implementation
pub trait HasName {
    fn name(&self) -> &str;
}

// Implement `Greeter` that is generic over `Context`
#[cgp_impl(new GreetHello)]
impl<Context> Greeter for Context
where
    Context: HasName, // Inject the `name` dependency from `Context`
{
    fn greet(&self) {
        println!("Hello, {}!", self.name());
    }
}

// A concrete context that uses CGP components
#[derive(HasField)] // Deriving `HasField` automatically implements `HasName`
pub struct Person {
    pub name: String,
}

// Compile-time wiring of CGP components
delegate_components! {
    Person {
        GreeterComponent: GreetHello, // Use `GreetHello` to provide `Greeter`
    }
}

fn main() {
    let person = Person {
        name: "Alice".into(),
    };

    // `CanGreet` is automatically implemented for `Person`
    person.greet();
}

```
