---
slug: v0-3-0-release
title: 'CGP Updates: v0.3.0 Release and New Chapters'
authors: [soares]
tags: [release]
---

I'm excited to announce the release of [v0.3.0](https://github.com/contextgeneric/cgp/releases/tag/v0.3.0) of the [`cgp`](https://docs.rs/cgp/0.3.0/cgp/) crate, along with several [new](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/error-handling.html) [chapters](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/field-accessors.html) of the [CGP Patterns](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/) book! This post highlights some of the key features and updates included in this release.

<!-- truncate -->

# New Book Chapters

We’ve added a few new chapters to the [CGP Patterns](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/) book. Below is a brief summary of the newly published content.

## Associated Types

In the [launch announcement](/blog/early-preview-announcement/) for CGP, some readers remarked that CGP seemed to be primarily a dependency injection framework in Rust. While this observation captured part of its functionality, a key feature not yet covered was CGP's ability to use _abstract types_ in conjunction with the dependency injection of _types_.

In the [new chapter](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/associated-types.html) of the book, we explore this powerful feature with a motivating example: implementing a context-generic authentication token validator that is not only generic over the `Context` but also over abstract `Time` and `AuthToken` types. The chapter also demonstrates how to use the `cgp_type!` macro to streamline the declaration of abstract type traits and how to employ `UseType` in component wiring to instantiate abstract types.

## Error Handling

CGP introduces a novel approach to error handling that differs significantly from the conventional patterns used in Rust today. In the [new chapter](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/error-handling.html) of the book, we begin by leveraging an abstract `Error` type from `HasErrorType` to define error-returning method signatures. The chapter then delves into how `CanRaiseError` and `CanWrapError` can be used to produce abstract errors within context-generic provider implementations. Further, the chapter discusses how to define context-generic error raisers and leverage the `UseDelegate` pattern for static dispatching of error handling to various providers.

## Field Accessors

CGP provides a robust mechanism for dependency injection using [impl-side dependencies](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/impl-side-dependencies.html). However, since these dependencies are expressed through traits and constraints, we need to define _accessor traits_ to retrieve field values from a generic context.

In the [new chapter](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/field-accessors.html), we explore different approaches for defining, using, and implementing accessor traits in CGP. This chapter explains how the `#[derive(HasField)]` macro operates and dives into the internal workings of `HasField` and `Symbol!`. It also introduces the` #[cgp_auto_getter]` and `#[cgp_getter]` macros, which automatically generate accessor provider implementations that work with `HasField`.

# `cgp` v0.3.0 Release

The `cgp` crate has been upgraded from `v0.2.0` to `v0.3.0`, introducing new features that significantly enhance usability and include minor breaking changes. You can view the full [release notes here](https://github.com/contextgeneric/cgp/releases/tag/v0.3.0). Additionally, the [Hello World example](/#hello-world-example) on the project homepage has been updated to showcase a simplified implementation using the latest CGP constructs.

Below is a summary of key updates in this release.

## `cgp_type!` Macro

The new `cgp_type!` macro streamlines the process of declaring abstract type traits, enabling you to define them in a single line of code. For instance, the `HasErrorType` trait in `cgp` is now defined as:

```rust
cgp_type!( Error: Debug );
```

The `cgp_type!` macro expands this short declaration into the following:

```rust
#[cgp_component {
    name: ErrorTypeComponent,
    provider: ProvideErrorType,
}]
pub trait HasErrorType {
    type Error: Debug;
}

impl<Context, Error> ProvideErrorType<Context> for UseType<Error>
where
    Error: Debug,
{
    type Error = Error;
}
```

For a detailed explanation of cgp_type! and its usage, check out the new [Associated Types](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/associated-types.html#defining-abstract-type-traits-with-cgp_type) chapter in the CGP Patterns book.

## `#[cgp_auto_getter]` Macro

The `#[cgp_auto_getter]` macro simplifies the process of defining accessor traits with blanket implementations based on `HasField`. When a trait is marked with `#[cgp_auto_getter]`, any context deriving `HasField` that has the required fields and types will automatically implement the specified trait without additional boilerplate.

Here’s an example illustrating how it works:

```rust
use cgp::prelude::*;

#[cgp_auto_getter]
pub trait HasName {
    fn name(&self) -> &String;
}

#[derive(HasField)]
pub struct Person {
    pub name: String,
}

fn main() {
    let person = Person {
        name: "Alice".into(),
    };

    println!("Hello, {}", person.name());
}
```

In this example, the `Person` struct derives the `HasField` trait, which automatically implements the `HasName` trait without any additional code. This means that an accessor trait like `HasName` can be defined in separate crates or modules, and it will still be automatically implemented for all structs that derive `HasField` with the necessary fields.

For more details on `#[cgp_auto_getter]`, refer to the [Generic Accessor Providers](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/generic-accessor-providers.html#the-cgp_auto_getter-macro) chapter in the CGP Patterns book.

## `#[cgp_getter]` Macro

The `#[cgp_getter]` macro, like `#[cgp_auto_getter]`, generates blanket implementations that make use of `HasField`. However, `#[cgp_getter]` extends functionality by also creating full CGP constructs for the trait, similar to `#[cgp_component]`. This requires explicit wiring in the context using `delegate_components!`. Additionally, `#[cgp_getter]` derives a blanket implementation for the `UseFields` provider, so that it can be used inside the component wiring as follows:

```rust
use cgp::prelude::*;

#[cgp_getter {
    provider: NameGetter,
}]
pub trait HasName {
    fn name(&self) -> &String;
}

#[derive(HasField)]
pub struct Person {
    pub name: String,
}

pub struct PersonComponents;

impl HasComponents for Person {
    type Components = PersonComponents;
}

delegate_components! {
    PersonComponents {
        NameGetterComponent: UseFields,
    }
}

fn main() {
    let person = Person {
        name: "Alice".into(),
    };

    println!("Hello, {}", person.name());
}
```

For additional information on `#[cgp_getter]`, refer to the [Generic Accessor Providers](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/generic-accessor-providers.html#the-cgp_getter-macro) chapter of the CGP Patterns book.

## `CanWrapError` Trait

The `CanWrapError` trait has been introduced to streamline the process of wrapping existing errors. Its definition is as follows:

```rust
#[cgp_component {
    provider: ErrorWrapper,
}]
pub trait CanWrapError<Detail>: HasErrorType {
    fn wrap_error(error: Self::Error, detail: Detail) -> Self::Error;
}
```

Previously, error wrapping relied on using `CanRaiseError` with a tuple, such as `CanRaiseError<(Self::Error, Detail)>`. However, this approach was cumbersome and less intuitive. The `CanWrapError` trait addresses this issue by providing a cleaner and more straightforward way to raise wrapped errors.

For more details about the usage of `CanWrapError`, refer to the [Error Wrapping](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/error-wrapping.html) chapter in the CGP Patterns book.

## `cgp-error-anyhow` Crate

We have published a new [`cgp-error-anyhow`](https://docs.rs/cgp-error-anyhow/0.3.0/cgp_error_anyhow/index.html) crate, which provides context-generic error raisers for `anyhow::Error`. This addition complements the previously published [`cgp-error-eyre`](https://docs.rs/cgp-error-eyre/0.3.0/cgp_error_eyre/index.html) and [`cgp-error-std`](https://docs.rs/cgp-error-std/0.3.0/cgp_error_std/index.html) crates, which support CGP error handling with `eyre::Error` and `Box<dyn core::error::Error + Send + Sync + 'static>`. Given the popularity of `anyhow::Error`, this crate extends support for its usage.

Details on using `cgp-error-anyhow` for error handling can be found in the [Error Handling](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/error-handling.html#the-cgp-error-anyhow-crate) chapter of the CGP Patterns book.

## `cgp-runtime` Crate

The new [`cgp-runtime`](https://docs.rs/cgp-runtime/0.3.0/cgp_runtime/index.html) crate introduces standardized interfaces for runtimes, paving the way for future discussions on asynchronous programming in the CGP Patterns book.

The constructs provided by `cgp-runtime`, which are re-exported by `cgp`, include:

```rust
cgp_type!( Runtime );

#[cgp_getter {
    provider: RuntimeGetter,
}]
pub trait HasRuntime: HasRuntimeType {
    fn runtime(&self) -> &Self::Runtime;
}
```

Stay tuned for updates to the CGP Patterns book for more information on using pluggable async runtimes with CGP.

# Future Work

There are several additional features and improvements I had hoped to include in this update. However, with my New Year vacation coming to an end, I need to wrap up the current progress. Below are some of the tasks deferred to future updates.

## Documenting the `cgp` Crate

While the CGP Patterns book offers extensive conceptual coverage, the `cgp` crate currently lacks comprehensive Rustdoc documentation. Many constructs remain undocumented, and users must rely on the CGP Patterns book or this website for detailed guidance.

In future updates, I plan to add concise Rustdoc comments to these constructs and include links to relevant chapters in the CGP Patterns book. This will help bridge the gap and provide in-crate documentation to enhance usability. For now, all detailed information about CGP is accessible only through the book and website.

## Tutorials with More Complex Use Cases

During the [launch announcement](/blog/early-preview-announcement/), many readers noted the lack of practical examples demonstrating how CGP can address more complex, real-world problems. While I had planned to create such tutorials, much of my time was spent completing relevant chapters and updating the `cgp` crate. I ask for your patience as I work on delivering concise, compelling examples to better illustrate CGP's utility.

In the meantime, the simplified examples in the recently added [Associated Types](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/associated-types.html), [Error Handling](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/error-handling.html), and [Field Accessors](https://patterns.contextgeneric.dev/field-accessors.html) chapters provide a glimpse into CGP's practical applications. These include examples like validating whether an authentication token has expired and making HTTP API calls to fetch messages. While not exhaustive, these examples go beyond the basic "Hello World" tutorial on the homepage and offer a clearer picture of how CGP can be applied to your projects.

# Acknowledgement

A big thank you to [@marvin-hansen](https://github.com/marvin-hansen) for his enthusiastic involvement in discussions, testing CGP with real-world projects, and providing invaluable feedback! The implementation of the `#[cgp_getter]` and `#[cgp_auto_getter]` macros was primarily motivated by his input, highlighting that the direct use of `HasField` could be too complex for beginners. Thanks to his suggestions, CGP now offers a more seamless and intuitive experience for declaring and using field accessor traits.

Thanks also to everyone who contributed feedback to the launch announcement on [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/1hkzaiu/announcing_contextgeneric_programming_a_new/) and [Lobsters](https://lobste.rs/s/a5wfid/context_generic_programming)! Your insights have been incredibly helpful in shaping the direction of CGP and prioritizing upcoming work. There’s still a long journey ahead before CGP reaches v1.0 and is ready for widespread use, and I appreciate your continued support as we work toward that goal!
